Warm greetings. Touch your leg. Warm greetings. Wonderful, such sacred time to have together.
So thanks for coming. Thanks for joining. To really get to have the time to listen to,
contemplate, and meditate on the Dharma. It's always really sacred, special time. So trying
to reactivate that in my own experience and then offering that opportunity for you to do so as well
,
just as the Venerable Kempa Rinpoche's and all these lineage masters. It reminded us again and
again to try to activate these three motivations anytime we're kind of doing anything actually,
but then specifically in a Dharma context to really try to bring them vividly to mind and kind of
in
an openness of heart. And that is renunciation or joy and appreciation and deep gratitude for all
the amazing things that we have in our experience right now in our lives. So this renunciation. And
then secondly, Borichitta, all of us, all beings, every single one, we all want to be free of
suffering and we're all going through a lot of challenges. And so really trying to bring kind of
a bigger view, a bigger openness of heart, a real tenderness and also a very kind of rooted bravery
that, you know, when we're doing this practice together, when we're coming to contemplate the
Dharma together, that we're doing this for all beings. May this be the cause for all beings to
be happy in every way they can be happy and to be free of suffering and the causes of suffering,
finally free forever, enlightened. So then thirdly, we take this even more courageous view of this
kind of Vajra, Vajra view, Vajra pride or the three Vajras or pure perception, trying to really
tune into the amazing qualities within ourselves and our environment within each other and to
really see everything kind of in this more kind of sacred vision and like kind of a pure way, not
so much funneled through our own kind of tightness or kind of our own in a sense like distorted
kind
of exaggerations, always kind of emphasizing what's not quite right. So instead of doing that,
trying to really see what's really amazing in a very, very vast way. So this pure perception
and as Vajrayana practitioners, we're even in the beginning, we're learning, then we should always
try to reactivate these three points that will bring the three Yana teachings and the foundational
Buddhism, Sutra Mahayana teachings and Vajrayana all together in a single kind of point and that's
so just kind of vividly bring these three points to mind right now.
So today is kind of a little bit of like a free flow one. So the general topic is some
basic tips on refreshing our practice. So basic tips on refreshing our practice.
This is obviously a very big topic and then I'm really going to just kind of say reminders to
myself in a just a kind of very honest, genuine way. What do I need to do to refresh in my practice
?
And these are just things that kind of came to my mind and they're all based on Dharma teachings
in no certain order. So it didn't really take the time to kind of lay out points but kind of some
points I've thought and like my very limited experience of ways that have helped me kind of
re-tune a real line with the Dharma, kind of reactivate my bodhicitta, reactivate my renunciation,
reactivate kind of this sacred awareness. So what's helped me do that and what kind of teachings I
remember. So just kind of repeating some teachings and then if any of these are helpful, there's
like
a I'm not sure who's watching this, who will see this, what AI will read this and just send this
somewhere, whoever, whenever, forever, who knows. So if any of the little bits are actually helpful
,
then that's good and the rest, don't worry. And so there's this vast spectrum of practitioners,
we all have different worldviews that we're coming from and we all have different things
we're really good at, different challenges that we're kind of occupied with or kind of we stumble
on to. So that said, you know, it's kind of more of like a buffet of certain things to say so
in not a specific order, okay. Basic tips on refreshing practice, reminders to myself,
that's the parenthesis there. So one, I'm just going to go out of the gate, not explain too
much because it's more like a list and then we'll see what's helpful, okay. So not some big
elaboration. Okay, number one, Dharma is not therapy, therapy is therapy. There's so many kinds of
therapy and in so many ways they're so valuable, but we shouldn't mix these up. So use Dharma for
Dharma and use therapeutic methods for therapeutic methods. If we mix these up, it can bring a lot
of kind of different kind of confusion in our practice. It can kind of cause us our practice
to do kind of all kinds of different things. So point one, there's Dharma and therapy and they're
both very valuable, really valuable, sincerely really valuable, but we should distinguish the two
from each other. Otherwise it can really make the practice kind of get really kind of jumbled.
So that's one, to talk about that for years, but that's just one point. Two,
almost all Dharma is really, there's a lot of ways to look at it,
but in one way it's all about being prepared for challenges and big challenge we all face
as sentient beings is when we're dying and when we die. So it's just coming and we don't know when
it's coming. So something that different masters have mentioned is have some familiarity with it.
This is actually kind of one of the bedrock essential reasons to practice Dharma is to be
able to use the opportunity of challenge such as moment of death and with really kind of amazing
benefit to be ready for that. And then a technique they say at some point in practice and that's
according to the guidance of your teacher and your own connections, some degree like a PoA practice
,
being ready like I don't know when I'm gonna die, I'm planning to have Dharma practice for however
many years, but I'm not really sure. So like one, the aim of Dharma and practice is to really get
ready for that time when I don't control anything and just dying, can't really control anything.
And then my tendencies to be scared and freak out are going to definitely come up if I haven't kind
of worked with them at all. And then these very swift techniques and Vajrayana skillful means
such as a PoA practice, if you have a connection to that, you have a teacher, you have an interest,
then that's something to look into at some point in your path. This can also clarify like why we're
doing Dharma, to kind of bring this more freshly to mind. I am going to die and I don't know when
and I won't be able to control the circumstances. So like refreshing that awareness, it kind of
will
like line up the practice kind of according to certain essential points.
And three, I thought Tonglen, so many times, Tonglen, this giving and taking, sending and receiving
,
giving others our happiness, taking on their suffering. This is such a profound essential
practice in Sutra Mariana and Bodhisattva Yana, which means it's like heart of Vajrayana.
And it's also like works with the breath. So it means it's really grounded in the body.
And that's something that for so many of us, myself definitely to like really bring in my body
in a very kind of active conscious way. This practice can like really be a very visceral
reminder of bodhicitta working with my body in the breath. And kind of it and it's like a very
simple practice we can do anytime. It doesn't have to be a formal setting. And we can do it
silently
without anyone knowing. So this is like a very special technique we have. And this is like a
heart technique of bodhisattva path, Tonglen. And there's a lot of technique, a lot of practices,
instructions on this. But in terms of it, the practice is getting stale. Oh, kind of there's
a lot of funny things we can kind of start looping into our practice and kind of forget the main
point. Tonglen really reactivates bodhicitta as the main reason we're doing practice.
May I have the ability to take on the suffering of all beings and give them every happiness,
all the merit I've made, give it to all the beings. That this is the whole big bedrock point
of doing dharma from a Vajrayana perspective and Sutra Mahayana perspective, this very bold
compassion.
So that's another point. When someone elicits a really strong response in you,
grabs your attention really strongly, and a poison is so easy to come out,
then it can be a good refreshing practice to really just connect again to the four boundless.
That can just be a habit. You know, if we write that, "When I get mad, practice four boundless."
Then we can do this four boundless prayer. It's just four lines and something we can easily
memorize. So that can just be kind of like a thing we go to. "Oh, I see myself getting really
jealous
again. Oh, I see myself getting really kind of lustful and desirous again. Oh, I need to really
reactivate four boundless for myself too." That can be something that all of a sudden we don't get
so strongly in a groove of again and again expressing our negative emotion, our destructive
emotion, and overtaking our mindfulness. So this four boundless, like that's so someone comes and
they say something mean or something, I'll try to immediately think, "Oh, the four boundless."
Even if it's just a rote habit, then it's just a reminder to kind of reactivate the freshness of
our practice. "Oh, why am I doing this practice?" Infinite happiness, generate infinite happiness,
infinite compassion, infinite sympathetic joy, infinite equanimity. All beings, even all beings
being equal, they all have Buddha nature. We all have the same world. We have the same human bodies
amongst humans. We have the same desire to be happy and avoid suffering, to really refresh in
these four boundless. It's just so essential. So I say that for myself too. Another point to
refresh
in practice, try to regularly talk about Dharma with your friends. It's so nice to have friends.
Try to make a point of it. Go out of your way, schedule some time. If you're not around Dharma
people, call some people, call some friends, catch up, and specifically talk about certain Dharma
things. Well, what Dharma books like, how are things going? Are you reading any Dharma lately?
Have you seen any nice Dharma YouTube videos? Or what have you been thinking about? But
specifically
around Dharma. It can really kind of reactivate our initial kind of enthusiasm about the precious
ness
of Dharma and the specialness of having friends, having people we care about actually to talk about
Dharma with. And then we see their perspective on it. They re-clarify our perspective. We share
things kind of, and it makes it a little more personal, kind of starts to like infuse our
relationships. It can be helpful when our practice gets a little too lonely or a little too kind of
quiet or self-contained. Just kind of freshen it up. Reach out to some friends, Dharma sisters,
Dharma brothers, and just talk about the Dharma a little bit. You can have study groups, book
groups,
that kind of thing too. But just even every now and then talk about the Dharma, I think is really
helpful. Another point again, right? These are in no certain order. Guru Yoga. It's the heart of
Vajrayana practice. It's definitely the heart essence of Zogchen. Guru Yoga. Always have Guru
Yoga as a practice, especially as a Vajrayana practitioner. It's always going to be a part of
Nundra. It's always going to be an important part of every single practice we do. Devotion,
compassion. We have devotion for the beings, the noble ones that are free. We have compassion for
all the beings and ourselves that aren't free. Devotion and compassion. In Vajrayana context,
the great Turtanjatasaninkpa said these are the two pillars to boost your Vajrayana practice.
Devotion to those above and compassion for those equal and below. Devotion for the free enlightened
ones. Compassion for all of us circling in samsara. And the heart practice of devotion is Guru Yoga
.
And there's so many Guru Yogas. So just kind of to remember that this is really such an essential
practice, specifically for Vajrayana practitioners. And if devotion is not coming so strongly to us
,
then great masters say, like Zogchen, he says, if you don't have much devotion,
then pray to Guru Rinpoche to have more devotion.
And Guru Rinpoche will help. Pray to the Buddha for more devotion. We need to use these duality
minds to help themselves get out of their duality. This is a Vajrayana method. That's what skillful
means is all about. Using our relative experiences to have them undo their kind of boundedness,
to open themselves up. Use duality to undo duality. So we need to pray to these beings
for their help. Even if they're just in our mind, even if everything's our mind,
then the display still happens. We need to work with the display. Then definitely prayer is a
big part of that. Even though Buddhism is non-theistic, doesn't believe in entities at all.
There's no thing at all in Buddhism. Not even this moment of watching a video or listening to
anything. So these profound teachings, even if there's no thing and everything is really
empty of being stuck and fixed in some frozen way. We still need to pray to the beings, the noble
ones, the enlightened beings to help us actually recognize this and thoroughly integrate it in our
experience all the time to really see the fluidity, the flexibility of mind. We need the supports,
secondary supports to realize the principle point, which is this nature of mind being free of all
fixation. And a big practice to do that is guru yoga, which is always part of nundra practice.
He's calling the lama from afar prayers, right? Which we'll do here shortly.
Like so many times, Venerable Kempo, and Venerable Kenshin, Paul and Cher, said,
read the life stories of the great masters to inspire your practice. See what obstacles they
overcame. See the amazing qualities they achieved. Read about the Buddha. Reflect on the qualities
of what an enlightened being, what's that like? This really kind of a rule, reactivate and
refreshing our close connection to the Dharma. Why are we doing this? Read life stories. So someone
who like immediately kind of, oh, something zings in your mind about hearing the person or
your own teacher, then it's kind of, you know, don't have just every now and then, or just when you
,
especially when you're really kind of feeling flat or dry or stale in your practice, read the life
story. And now there's so many avenues of media where we can refresh in connection to teachers
in the lineage. So it doesn't just have to be a book, but it could be a book too.
In terms of all that media, we really, I think it's called like, there's different ways to talk
about it, but we have to determine how we filter what we kind of take in. So we have to be really
discerning about that. In terms of practice, it's going to shape us, what we eat, you know,
it becomes our bodies. What we, what our mind eats, the experiences we feed it, it shapes our mind.
And there's so many things to choose from. And it's getting bigger every day. So regardless,
we have discern, we're making these choices anyway. So we need to really clearly bring to
mind what actually helps boost my practice. What can I take in more that's nutritious for my
practice? What do I know about myself that really shuts off my practice or stunts my practice and
gets, makes me a lot more confused than that's called discernment. To see that about oneself,
to have that self knowledge or self awareness. And we can't just expect someone else to always
filter everything from for us like Google, or just some other person always having to be there to
remind us what to do a certain be your own master, as the Buddha said, at certain point, we really
do
have to take on that responsibility to self filter to really consciously choose like what am I
taking
in? What am I available? What am I ready to be able to handle where it won't disrupt make my
practice it won't make it shaky. Then only we know ourselves best. As the campus owner which
I said many times, and we need to have the mindfulness to kind of check in with that.
Otherwise, it's easy for our practice kind of sidetracked with so many distractions.
I very much know about that. All the distractions. A big point to refreshing practice is really
always
returning to the basics. Basic means essential, it means bedrock, it means it's always important to
include. It's the nuts and bolts of the of our practice of our study of the path. So these four
thoughts that turn the mind to the Dharma, or that turn away from samsara, preciousness of human
embodiment, impermanence, cause and effect, samsara life is really challenging, conditioned mind is
very challenging. That again and again we should come back to this, contemplate this, read about
this like words of my perfect teacher or Shantideva's way of the bodhisattva or to spend time at
the
beginning of our nundra practice, the common nundra, really spend extra time. We can zoom in on one
of
the four thoughts or just repeat all four of them more and more and more and repeat them and then
pause and let our minds kind of be with it. It's really important this is really part of the
renunciation, foundation of our practice or cultivating joy and appreciation.
So we should really come back to these basics, basics meaning always important, every single
moment, every single session. They'll really reinvigorate our practice, doesn't use a lot
of complicated logic, we don't need it's very common sensical, we don't have to take anyone's
word for it, it's impermanence for example, to really highlight that again.
It'll really reinvigorate the point, our direction of practice, the point of our practice.
Part of that is just again and again if we can recite refuge in bodhicitta prayers.
Again refuge prayers four lines, bodhicitta prayer, they can be very extensive or very
simple. It's really good to memorize some of these simple practices because so many times in our
lives are these in-between times where we're moving from one thing to another, a place to another,
a project to another, moving between meals, in a car. These we have so many in-between times,
these transitional times. Then if we have a certain memorized prayers we can do these prayers
and connect to the dharma and why is memorizing a prayer good? Because these are the words of noble
ones. They weren't just invented recently. Even to repeat their words we're connecting with the
vision they had, the realization they had, the power they had, the goodness, the skillful means.
Now that pattern is in our mind. We have their words in our mind. It's in our alaya and we
connect to that and just go for refuge again. Say the bodhicitta prayer again, say four boundless
prayer again. You could be in the car waiting. If you memorize your nundra practice, just recite
the nundra practice again or go to a certain part of the nundra practice. If we memorize these
short
prayers it can really be a big enhancement for our practice with all these in-between
times we have in life. That often time we just don't pick up a phone and fill the time that way.
We could just pause and you know there's so many so many things we could do that are really wholes
ome
with that time. Three things we always have in terms of like trying to think of things. How can
we bring all the practice into a single simple set? The master Patra Karmiche said some time ago,
always kind of bring together the gut, the heart and the head. The head is this wisdom,
intelligence.
The heart is compassion and bodhicitta. The gut is one's integrity or this even vadriyana context
vadra pride. The essential goodness that one has to reconnect to that goodness and with kindness
and genuine concern for others activate that heartfelt bodhicitta. Then with discernment
and clarity and a flexibility and openness of mind to like brighten the wisdom of not necessarily
the
head but is just an easy way to kind of remember. Head, heart, gut, wisdom, compassion, and dignity
.
A certain sense of internal strength, a resolve.
It's like a simple way to kind of, oh if I reframe my practice, oh it's something's not working,
oh am I including my head and my heart and my gut? Okay a head, heart, gut, okay I'm doing that.
All right now practice. It's kind of some simple reframing can sometimes really help.
I find it good if you there's certain points in a teaching or certain instructions you've
received from your teacher over the years or recently to write them down somehow. Write it
down and come back to those. Pull out that paper and read it again later. Week later, month later,
year later, five years later there's a connection you have to that teaching you receive directly
from your teacher. Pull out that paper, really reflect on that instruction again. This can be
incredibly impactful that we have this personal instruction we've received from a teacher.
And then secondly another way to receive which kind of related like to receive the teachings well
is to take every teaching that you're at as a personal instruction. It's not an instruction
for the neighbor. It's something immediately you want to take it into your mind stream as if this
is advice for me and even if it's not immediately relevant to me the future is a very vast big
project and at some point it's going to be relevant and helpful for me on my path. So to receive
the
teaching as like a personal advice doesn't mean we have to do it all at once but to be open to have
an openness of mind where we're not immediately we take a teaching and we're like kind of
letting it stream and oh this teaching's for that person and this teaching's for that person and I
know this other person has that problem and this instead of doing that we're take it to me
and like have it like really sink in my heart so that it can open up my own ego grasping
and if not now then for the future time. And also it becomes a set of skillful means on a
bodhisattva path that we're learning things so in the future this becomes another way that we can
like kind of very intelligently communicate and be with others if we're kind of in that
moment of receiving a teaching to kind of receive it with that kind of openness and willingness to
absorb it to let that shock the kind of shock of that goodness like sink in us instead of
immediately
kind of like water off a duck's back just kind of redirecting it somewhere else.
Like a mundane thing I found with practice I have like many pages of this but I'm not going to get
to all of it but a main thing a mundane thing I found is you know check in with the news what's
going on in the world but don't do it every all the time because this can actually I mean
there's a lot of reasons around this but in terms of for practice it can be very disruptive.
We need to know what's going on we care about the world we care about beings we want to know
what's happening but at a certain point it's just kind of like gossip because if we can't really do
much about it and it just kind of putting us in a really agitated state of mind where we're always
upset or we have this kind of standard for ourselves so we're always have to know about
everything because otherwise I'm not really proficient enough I'm not good enough I'm like
kind of shirking my duty as a responsible citizen to not know about every single thing that
happened
in the world today that's a really unrealistic goal we can't know that we've never known that
as human beings a Buddha is ready to know that information that's why they're omniscient
because their bodhicitta is limitless but I'm personally not ready but to know a little bit
know what's going on really immediately because that's where mainly I can like actually help
beings I as a limited being have more kind of availability to like show up for what's immediately
around around me because it's just right happening in front of me but then the larger framing of
the
world and other things it's just touch in but don't don't make it so that that's like your
job to know about the news and not really ever do much about it just be upset because that it'll
really kind of undermine our our gut and our head and our heart it can really cause us to be in a
very pretty destructive state of mind way too much of the time where we become broken-hearted
practitioners instead of soft-hearted practitioners we need that tenderness of heart but we need
that
bravery of gut and we need that open flexible illusory kind of like engagement with life
the wisdom otherwise it's just heartbreaking to listen to all the bad news
and it doesn't kind of like it won't be a long-lasting strategy on the buddhist path too much too
soon
another thing with that all these updates we always get I found it really helpful to like
I don't have a smartphone but I have an ipod to like turn off most of the notifications
it's all mundane stuff but constantly your mind has to go to something else
you constantly break frame of your what you're working with the practice you're doing you're
practicing you're trying to do some mantras for example you're trying to sit there quietly and
every few minutes is bing bing whoosh bing bing bing no I mean who can handle that
it's so disruptive at least silence the phone but if you just turn off some notifications it makes
it I mean just your phone's there you can look at all the things but it's not controlling you so
much I really found that really helpful when I turned off a lot of these notifications on my ipod
this is not a dharma thing this is just a regular everyday thing some more regular everyday things
is our body and our minds really like regularity
they it just really it's just a fact and like natural systems like rhythms
they don't like it when it's always disrupted now it's 40 degrees now it's negative five
the what the natural systems can't handle these jumps so well and our minds are similar and so
are our bodies so regular rhythms say that for myself regular eating regular sleeping
regular exercising all these mundane things that are like caring for our body our vessel
there's stuff that like I know the shoulds that I know I should do eat more greens eat more whole
foods eat less processed foods these simple things you don't have to be a really sophisticated
doctor
they're simple basic things people have known for a long time but then the question is doing them
I know camperomache once was really strong in the 2011 his mountain retreat instructions he was
giving commentary on those of his homeless dude rumba che and he said that really clearly we know
for the most part what we should do our buddha nature knows our intelligence knows this is a
question of like aligning that intention our motivation our knowledge with our action
so to have the gap between the intention and the action lesson so what we know is the good
healthy bodhisattva move for ourselves and others then we kind of do that and regularity can really
help avoid some of the disruption and distraction that comes with just kind of being out of sync
it's just difficult to manage that kind of juggling when it's irregular
um one thing is try to keep open mind
with stuff we don't understand yet and buddhism is filled with that as for sentient beings all the
teachings on the six realms pass in future lives and like super powers and metacognitive abilities
and all this subtle level causation just keep an open mind maybe at least maybe like maybe
maybe mind or at or a what if mind well what if that is possible at least pause leave some space
in the room where we haven't let made a firm decision on as if we know we're like capable to
no for sure 100 something is true or false with some of these subtler level causation things
if we keep a little space maybe or maybe it allows room for us to grow
it's like even being a scientist being an open-minded scientist
it's really important to have the open-minded part otherwise we really limit what we can learn
new things we can learn things unknowns that we didn't know about patterns that we didn't see yet
so like kind of have this fresh open mind like hold it lightly
and if it's if it's inspiring for us to think of past and future lives which it is for me
definitely very much so then let that inspiration be fuel for your practice
it's the openness that's kind of this main point here
the open mind not not soggy mind and wish-washy mind but open maybe and then if you really get
interested in something look closely research discern test it taste it check it out if it's
really something that's very activating for you like how you have a connection with it
this is a long list and i'm just jumping around a lot but i found some of these things really
helpful for me i think one of them is realistically we have to go deeper somewhere we can't go deep
everywhere that means at a certain point we really do have to choose what we want to really
hone or care for or really deepen whether it's a certain practice a certain kind of field of study
anything any educations like that we can't learn everything at once we have to like specifically
go deep in certain spots and so in terms of buddha dharma then like having those bedrock
essentials be clear if we go deep in those it'll give us a good foundation for all these other
things we could explore because it'll keep things lined up with the dharma with the teachings of
the
buddha but at a certain point we really do have to decide to go deep somewhere we just can't get
around it if we try this practice that practice and we keep moving around like the ribbon shades
it said so many times it's like transplanting a plant too much it doesn't take a root really
strongly anywhere and eventually it makes the plant very very weak so we just kind of have that
reality life is short and we have to choose to go deep somewhere at some point so you kind of
really investigate for yourself and then go deep and then check in with other people with your
teachers your expert other experts and see if it's working out for you wherever you chose to
go deep like you know check in again
in buddhism it's such a long path there's so many things to study there's so many practices
so learning some of these essential frameworks is really helpful to have the practice keep on track
like the four noble trues four seals three turnings of wheel of dharma four boundless
quality it's four boundless qualities it's not as if everything with a numbered system
is a what's called a metaheuristic or this a framing that like holds all of reality and like
very easy things to remember without kind of leaving anything out buddhism's filled with these
techniques but we should really learn some of these basic frameworks it'll help us from getting
too lost because the mind is a vast place to explore and the world is a very big playground
so having some essential frameworks like four noble trues and spending some time with four
noble trues the four these are essential dharma teachings can really help our practice stay on
track and when we get in deep somewhere and we kind of lose our footing we can always pull back
to these essential frameworks and they'll recorrect or realign our practice and our
motivation really stably in a reliable way according to the buddha dharma
there's simple things like that can refresh in practice like having a prayer wheel like just
spin the prayer wheel sometimes or like simple practices like say the mani mantra of chenrezig
if you have that transmission like as well as do as only as do go cancer is it hard of compassion
or heart treasure heart treasure of the enlightened ones is this whole big book is just on how
special
the mani mantra is in all these ways he unpacks it this nunye practice reciting the mani mantra
i mean it's so powerful but it's so simple too let's have a prayer wheel say oh mani peh meh
oh mani peh do that some it'll kind of can help kind of get merit fast because this is all it is
a lot about getting merit we need a boost of the merit of good positive qualities our own buddha
nature qualities we need to awaken them enlighten them boost them clarify them spin a prayer wheel
if you have a teacher have the teacher blessed a prayer wheel all of a sudden you're spinning a
breast blessed prayer wheel see ding and then all these mantras are going out it's so simple
say the mani mantra this sometimes just keeping it simple is so much is so much more reliable
it can really help to zoom out and be simple and at the same time fadriana is filled with skillful
means all these techniques like soak ceremonies and llama dances and san mandalas and making light
offerings and hanging prayer flags and making real essential smoke offerings there's such an array
of ways that we can these secondary qualities techniques we can use to boost our practice to
boost our intelligence and our awareness our heartfulness our bora chitta there's so many extra
like
extra practices we can do so if you have one that you really connect with and you feel your
practice
getting flat a little bit then go to these extra practices too and boost them and ask for help for
your teacher ask them is there any other things any things i can do that will support me to kind
of get back on track or kind of brighten my practice there's so many skillful means in
the vajriana path of skillful means and liberation so we should like we don't have to do all of
them
but every now and then it's really good to do some especially on these certain days
10th day 25th day but in between time too liberation upon seeing it's so easy put some
liberation upon seeing every now here and there like the the meritorious impact of these techniques
these skillful means is so deep according to what the buddha taught
a simple thing with practice is we should i should don't mistake what's good for me
being good for everybody because dharma is context sensitive it depends interdependence
what's good for me is good for me right now but what's good for someone else could be good for
them so just rejoice in what what's working for someone else even a non-buddhist thing
be so happy if someone's happy they have something working for them celebrate that oh you're just
so
happy rejoice don't make the mistake that fundamentalists move where oh this is the
best thing this is so good for me now everyone needs to try it too because it's a one-size-fits-all
approach the buddha was really strongly against this kind of thing because of interdependence
one thing isn't it's nothing is permanent like that it's where it's the same in all cases
depends on the situation on the context so i should look to my mind what's working for
my mind now and it's not necessarily what is everyone else needs to do too i shouldn't have
that kind of timidity of my own mind where i need everyone else to agree with me in order to be
okay
with my decision i should have this kind of confidence in my own decision without having
to have everyone just say yes drop but you're right because this i mean not gonna happen
see right all right i'm not going on i mean right now i've like cut two more minutes
okay some sara chores are endless it's endless endless so we shouldn't sacrifice our practice
for our chores we don't need to have a balance there's be responsible citizen responsible wife
husband friend partner uh co-worker all these things we need to show up with responsibility
in our commitments for sure but these the ways to show up in samsaric world is constantly changing
in so many details it's endless so at a certain point we really do have to say oh i can't keep
sacrificing kind of the principle thing like doing dharma things for all these things there's
always more dishes to do there's always some other project we can like rumba say right when
you sit down to do your practice if at that time you think oh my dharma books are a little messy
over there i should stop my practice and go straighten up my books that's an obstacle
that's not a dharma activity so we should see that for ourselves just not don't be swept away
in endless chores because they really are endless and then no one what they say no one dies and no
one when when people die no one dies having accomplished everything they wanted to there's
always things left on the list but when we die the only thing that really helps is the dharma
how much goodness did did i get familiar with in my life
how kind did my mind come become how open did my heart get how flexible is my mind
how resilient is my awareness how really like kind of how loving is my approach to experience
how much am i still fighting against reality instead how much am i embracing it well this
experience is happening now that's what will actually help us in the time of death and then
that's what will actually continue after we die anyway we don't get to keep all these things
and our status and names and like you know i mean it's like a few weeks after we die we don't even
remember our own name let alone the names of the people we were around that's what the barto
teaching say we can't yeah i can't even remember my own name but my mind is still there and the
the winds the karmic winds and the wisdom winds that came with that mind they were influenced by
the merit i did and the wisdom that i opened they're still with me so those are kind of keeping the
main part of meaning like principle of the practice like in the front and ask for help
pray to the buddhas ask your teacher ask good friends that you trust you know have trustworthy
friends that you care about and they care about you be a trustworthy friend that really when we
get stuck or flat or just gets kind of you know life kind of we get into these habit patterns you
know we're just we kind of start not paying attention so much to what's around us that's
awesome and we always look grass is always greener you know but like just check in with
friends with our loved ones with our teachers with our guides to help clarify that they can
give us some more perspective what we might be overlooking or taking for granted
because so much of it is in our favor already we have so many good things that are already in our
favor this human body this mind these good friends this special opportunity with the dharma living
lineage living lineage masters it's all right here for us already we get to stop here and
listening to me go on and on and now we get to practice the dharma it's such a sacred special
thing and then at the end of all these all the practices we do any good little things always
dedicate the merit even if it's just this four-line tsunami but this merit may all obtain omnis
cience
we just seal every good deed just take literally four seconds to just seal the deed with that
genuine heartfelt dedication and take that drop of goodness and put it in a vast ocean of goodness
that all these beings sentient beings and enlightened beings all this goodness we dedicate
that for the happiness and enlightenment of all beings and then seal it it'll really boost our
path now and long into the future on the kind of our bodhisattva path so those are a few kind of
random things that are coming to mind there's like four more pages of them but the time is short
so we're just kind of get jumped to the point um and i really if i'm saying too much there was
just something needed there's a lot of a lot of points could say a lot about them and i'm just
kind of zooming in and throwing things out i know it's like a special kind of like family friends
time and we just ate such good yummy food here so my mind's a little like so a little soggier
as on the soggy side plus a little little coffee so it's on the caffeinated soggy side so it's a
little kind of odd but really i hope this was help if i said stuff wrong oh yeah floss
don't forget the flaws in sunscreen i'm going to go with kurt vonnegut sunscreen use sunscreen
not really there's a really all these mundane things help our practice too because they prevent
these common worldly obstacles that end up if we don't deal with them go to the doctor regularly
we don't do that small things can become big things later like they said with these things
small negativities we really try to eliminate them and purify them quickly small positive things
just do that right away if you see you can do a good thing just do it don't second guess it just
do it because on them in the mundane level too these small little things if we try to care for
them as they come up then they don't avalanche into these big things later creating a lot of
obstacles that were fairly preventable life is precious and really thank you friends thank you
darman family thank you thank you all love you thank you all i'm gonna do some do some
do some tears are under practice thank you friends
a few little wrap-up things so
in terms of the topic of like boosting our practice refreshing our practice
our practice has to be honoring the human parts of ourselves and also the like deep buddha nature
parts of ourselves and then the same with others the humanness of others and the buddha nature of
others so we're constantly have these two sides we're trying to honor and care for so to refresh
in our practice we can like we have to boost both sides me as a me a specific human being
what helps me relax and kind of like open up and brighten and soften and be courageous and
playful and helpful and caring so that's all the me human stuff and then if we go deeper it goes
into buddha nature those are all natural kind of threads into the buddha dharma the buddha nature
in ourselves and so then these deeper qualities that aren't so much about me the unique me and my
unique habits but more the like unchanging nature of my mind and that kind of the deep kind of
richness of myself so like these in terms of boosting practice like anything that kind of
hooks in and locks us into a certain kind of humanness of me or a certain idea i have of my
buddha nature like our practice is trying to loosen that and freshen that kind of like have
that flow both sides better so just as a general kind of idea in the end but those places we get
stuck like say we're keep thinking about something that happened to us someone wronged us we have
this ongoing grudge then part of our something to loosen that because it really can stifle our
practice loosen that like dedicate some merit of your practice to that specific person or that
situation that resolve made that person have happiness in the causes of happiness and really
try to change that our connection to them our connection to our memory of what happened
like forgive that but i also do that with a practice where we dedicate the merit specifically
to help lighten that and resolve that and open that so it doesn't keep dragging us down
and i thought specifically for all the young men out there i wanted to say this because i'm a guy
a dude right and then i'm not that young anymore but youngish but in terms of freshening your
practice and i speak in generalizations and stereotypes and stuff please do make your bed
clean your room you know wash up and all the good things like being a person
good person who shows up like because that's just like caring about the situation you're in
and if you're a young guy and you think you're a toku you're probably not
it's probably the indication you're definitely not a toku if you think you're some special thing
so that can really get you mess up your practice if you think i'm so special i'm so special look
at me i'm doing this part of that usually comes with a lot of like first strong kind of very
militant enthusiasm like i'm going to practice so hardcore and it always pops i've seen it pop so
many times it's much more slow and steady pace and i think that's like that'll really soften the
practice because in the end we're trying to reframe the practice just isn't about me and it's not
just
about this life and it's not just about the stuff i can see really tried a long term really open
vision this is much more about future lives in terms of the buddhist conception what's this life
is just the result we're mainly experiencing the result of what happened a long time ago
we can't really change much of that we can just change how we respond to that and to plant seeds
for what comes next in the future so if we have a little bigger view of our practice more beings
not just me but more beings not just this life but more lives at least like open to the possibility
of that it'll kind of like help our practice soften and be a little more paced a little more
kind of like in touch with reality in a way and natural we should kind of get out of nature some
and like have playful time too not so serious not so trying to save all the world and do all this
i mean it's we want to have this urgent really deep concern for beings but at the same time like we
really didn't start this story i mean it really stuck in my mind we didn't start this this samsara
thing now this version our experience now this is a long time ago and like whatever we do with
our practice and the whole like freeing all beings of samsara it's not going to end in the next
year
this is a long-term vision we need to like actually give ourselves a little bit of a break
a little bit more open view like we're not going to just fix something this is like a bigger view
and like with that way like our practice i think becomes much more realistic more about natural
rhythms there's ups and downs and easy times and hard times and joyful times and sad times and
this is just kind of how life flows so amidst all that flowing let that flow happen that's about
being human but then in terms of what goes up and what goes down what is born and what dies
part of the practice really is recognizing what is undying what doesn't change
and that's like a really core aspect of the practice and the more this absolute buddha
nature aspect of the practice that we really shouldn't forget amidst all the changing
appearances that we experience and then try to we shouldn't forget that the absolute guru
the absolute bodhicitta too so a few little things thank you all really thank you it's
precious time thank you appreciate it thank you
you